---
layout: post
title: Covid FAQ
hidden: true
---

The post says "the vaccine has undergone rigorous testing, has been "approved" and is safe and effective, none of those claims are true."  I think all of those claims are true.

First, the vaccines did undergo rigorous testing. The clinical trials were large and rigorous, to my understanding to a degree equal to any other medication or vaccine. Prizer's trial, for example, gave the vaccine to 19,000 people and had another 19,000 as a control. There is a scientist blogger I trust on these things, Derek Lowe, and [here is his post on the clinical data presented to the FDA at the time of the hearing on emergency use authorization](https://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2020/12/09/the-fda-weighs-its-first-coronavirus-vaccine).

It is true that the coronavirus vaccines are not fully "approved" by the FDA, but instead have so far only received an "Emergency Use Authorization." But I think this is more of a legal and bureaucratic difference than a scientific one. At least for these vaccines, the clinical trials required for EUA were no different than for full approval, and in fact the companies are going to be applying for full approval without doing any additional trials. 

From what I can find, the only signifcant difference between EUA and approval in terms of safety data is "First, the FDA wants to see longer follow-up of trial participants, particularly at least six months of safety data (compared to the two months required for EUA submission). Second, the FDA needs more detailed chemistry, manufacturing, and control data (including requiring facility inspections) in a BLA submission." [Link here](https://blog.petrieflom.law.harvard.edu/2021/06/15/whats-the-difference-between-vaccine-approval-bla-and-authorization-eua/).

So if someone wanted to wait until full approval, I think that's reasonable, it does give the vaccines a little extra review and time to look at safety. But to call the existing authorization a "medical experiment" is inaccurate and, I suspect, done purposely to scare people.

Serious side effects are real, of course, though I think the data shows they are rare. You can't take one story of serious side effects out of the hundreds of millions of people who have gotten the vaccine and conclude that it's not safe. I see it as analogous to how the media can fasten on the one story they can find of a child who died from Covid, and that becomes the rationale to shut down all schools everywhere. You obviously have to weigh the costs and benefits of things.

A number of serious side effects have now emerged from the vaccines, but they have all been rare on the level of 10s of cases per million people vaccinated. This is too rare to have been caught in the clinical trials - too rare to have been caught in any clinical trials. They have been caught in the continuing monitoring and analysis of the vaccine effects, which has in fact been happening contrary to the claims of the post.

Myocarditis, which the post mentions, is one example. [The CDC has a report on it](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/wr/mm7027e2.htm#T2_down).  



When it comes to kids, *possibly* we're at a situation where the serious risk of Covid is low enough that the vaccine might not be worth it. But the point is that the risk from either is very very low. It's like comparing getting struck by lightning to being eaten by a shark.
